[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Many people think
that space is empty.
But is it?
In this episode, we explore
the fullness of space
and what it means to our
understanding of physics
and the universe.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What is space?
Really when we think about it,
space is everywhere, as we saw.
Atoms are mostly
made out of space.
And the little jiggle that
we call the material world
is just an electrostatic
field that's
interacting with each other
and makes it seem solid.
So basically, we have less
solid and more solid space.
When we talk about vacuum
fluctuation in physics,
people have a tendency to think
we're talking about a chamber
that we pull all the air out
and it's got a vacuum in there.
That's not what
we're talking about.
We're talking about the
energy in the space, right?
The vacuum fluctuation
is the energy
that would still be there if
you remove all the molecules
in a vacuum chamber.
And so it's something
that's already there.
And it's not something
that occurs only
in a certain condition
or in a certain region
or under certain
vacuum condition.
But it's basically
the jiggle of space
everywhere, whether
we're talking
about space like intergalactic
space or interstellar space
or if we're talking about space
at the molecular structure
like the space between atoms,
the space inside the atom,
the space inside particles.
All this space jiggle with
electromagnetic fluctuation.
And these vacuum fluctuations
appear in many different ways
in physics.
>> When Paul Dirac wrote the
equations for quantum field
theory, it appeared that these
fluctuations were popping
particles in and out of
our reality continuously.
>> This was described
as the Dirac Sea,
a sea of energetic
particle popping in and out
of our reality continuously.
And so they were
deemed to be virtual
just because they're
not in existence
in our experience
for a very long time.
That doesn't mean
they're not there.
The word virtual
particles, here,
does not mean that they're
not real particles.
It just means that
they're only there
for a very short amount of time.
And so these fluctuations
are essential to our equation
in quantum theory.
Many of the subatomic
particles are
thought to emerge from
these fluctuations.
And this fluctuation
of the vacuum
actually is the basis from
which, for instance, Higgs
was able to write his
equation for the Higgs-Boson
and for the Higgs
Interaction, the Higgs Field,
which was thought to
be the basis of mass,
or the emergence of mass.
So it really is omnipresent
in quantum field theory,
in quantum theory.
And it is, as well,
becoming more and more
utilized in our physics
all over the place,
including at the
cosmological level when
we look at the surface of
black holes and their dynamics.
So it's really interesting that,
for the first time as well,
we were able to observe the
fluctuations of the vacuum
at the cosmological level near
the surface of a neutron star.
It seems a little strange to
think that particles can come
from nothing, from the vacuum.
The thing is is that the
vacuum is not nothing.
In fact, we are not able to
find anywhere in the universe
where there is nothing.
There is always
electromagnetic fluctuation.
And this field, the
quantum fluctuation
of the vacuum at
the quantum scale,
has been deemed, as
well, zero point energy,
because even at 0 Kelvin,
these equations show that there
would still be fluctuation.
There's nowhere where
we can stop the vacuum
from being the vacuum.
This is very significant because
it means that it's everywhere.
And it's fluctuating.
That means it has
energy everywhere.
And this energy is non-trivial.
It's a lot of energy.
When we look at the
energy that we require
to relate the energy
of mass, gravity,
the dynamic of our universe,
the creation of our universe,
and so on, then
all of a sudden we
realize that there is a source
of energy that's already
present that we call
vacuum fluctuation,
and that that source could
be the source of everything.
This means that there is
nothing either than the vacuum,
meaning that the vacuum
fluctuations, when they become
coherent, are able
to produce what
we call as our material world.
Now, we will discuss
that in more details.
But these vacuum
fluctuations, although
their earlier
interpretation was thought
to be completely random, we're
discovering that they may not
be random, that they may
be polarized and organized
in certain ways that when
they do become organized,
they produce what
we call matter.
And as matter get together,
then the organization
of this information
field, if you'd like,
could become something
that we understand
as the source of what we call
awareness or consciousness.
So there's lots of implication
to understanding these vacuum
fluctuations, how they work,
what's their energy level,
and very importantly as we
describe, with the Casimir
effect.
>> If enough of a gradient can
be created in the structure
of the vacuum, we can get the
vacuum to produce work for us
as it moves through
the gradient.
When vacuum fluctuations push
or pump the Casimir plates
back and forth, we
can theoretically
extract energy in what is
called the Casimir effect.
Consider that if this
is the energy that
is producing all of our reality,
then the amount of energy
we can extract is enormous.
>> Now, it's important to
realize when we're talking
about the vacuum, and we're
talking about these vacuum
fluctuations, we're not just
talking about vacuum out there
or vacuum inside atoms.
We're talking about
vacuum inside of you.
You're made out of molecules.
You're made out of atoms.
And so the space inside of you,
which is 99.9999% percent you,
is fluctuating as well.
And this is a motion that
you may think as stochastic.
And certainly,
that's the way it's
been thought of, meaning
that it is random,
it has no organization.
And that's why, in general, it
has been ignored, because it's
thought to be irrelevant
since it all cancels out
to the random function of it.
>> In fact, science is
discovering that there are
regions of space
that are stochastic,
or have random probability
distribution or pattern that
may be analyzed statistically,
but may not be predicted
precisely.
This is where the
material cannot be seen.
But it is observed that
those regions are organized.
And that is where
matter emerges.
>> This might be, as well,
the source of black holes.
And matter might just be
smaller black holes coming out
of bigger black
holes, and so on.
And so there is a
whole new understanding
of physics that emerge from
realizing that these vacuum
fluctuations that
you're made of may
be the source of
this material world
and the energy of the material
world that is equal to mass,
or the structure of reality.
Although we think of these
fluctuations as random,
randomness may only be
an artifact of the sample
that you're looking at.
Let me give you an example.
If you put your nose
into a Persian rug,
you're going to see
particles of dust.
And you're going to
see fibers of the wool
that the carpet is made of.
And you might see a
few different colors
of these other fibers being
there, and then grains of sand
because the carpet is not
perfectly clean, and dust,
and all this.
You might look at all this,
looked like a complete mess.
And you might not be able
to see a pattern at all.
And most likely, you won't.
If you're looking close,
you will not see a pattern.
But then as soon as
you back up and you
start getting more and more
of the field of vision,
then you start to see patterns.
You start to see that there's
beautiful design of this rug.
You see the colors
actually working together
to produce this amazing design.
So when we look at
the universe or we
look at large
portion of space, we
might think that it
all looks random.
But actually, if we
looked big enough,
we might actually find
order in something
as large as a universe.
We've started to see
something like that.
We start to see large structure
on the cosmological scales
when we look at super clusters.
We see organization
where they start
to look like they're organizing
as huge octahedron, tetrahedron
in the space, like a crystal.
And we see
organization, certainly,
at the molecular level.
What we're discovering
is that when
the structure of the
vacuum itself is organized,
it produces effects that
we see as our reality.
And that is very
profound because we
realize that all of reality
is part of one thing that
is organized by the structure
of spin, by angular momentum,
by the geometry of the field.
Imagine that you
tried to define space.
And you find that OK,
well you can always
divide to smaller and
smaller and smaller space.
You would never reach the end.
You can divide one in half,
and then in quarters, and then
in eighths, and so on and
so on and so on and so on.
You will never
arrive at the end.
If there is energy there, then
it has an infinite potential.
Clearly, this could
be a source of energy
with infinite potential for
humanity, a source of energy
that would give us something
that could be thought
of as gravity control.
There's all kinds of
application in realizing
that we are all bathing
in this infinite,
or very close to
infinite, level of energy
that we call the vacuum.
We're discovering that this
vacuum energy is everywhere,
and that it's
producing everything.
And so we are starting
to think maybe
we can become vacuum engineers.
We can engineer
the vacuum together
to do a little bit of
what we want it to do.
And if we are
successful at this,
the implications are amazing.
On an everyday level,
what you should take away
from this episode
is that you are
bathing in a field of energy.
>> Our body is made of
that field of energy.
It's called atoms,
molecules, or cells.
This field of energy is flowing
in and out of the human body
continuously.
When it flows out of you,
you call it thermodynamics.
You call it the heat
of your body and so on.
When it's flowing
into you, maybe you
call it thoughts
and the energy that
propels you throughout the day.
Becoming aware of
this energy, becoming
aware of this source of reality,
allows you to maybe start
to manipulate it or start to
interact with it in such a way
that you feel more energized,
you feel more aligned,
you feel more
empathy for the rest
of the things in the space.
You start to feel nature.
You start to feel one with
the structure of space
instead of feeling
isolated and separated.
You feel unified
with the universe.
And that might bring
you a sense of comfort,
a sense of connection
that can lead you
to incredible discoveries and
a sense of wellness that could
be transformative in your life.
So this is really what
I wanted to convey
in these first few episodes,
is that this is real.
It's been measured.
It's there.
We know it's there.
And it's rapidly
arriving to a place
where myself and many other
scientists are realizing, wow.
This could be the
source of everything.
And we're finally getting there.
And we can start
to interact with it
in a completely different way.
The separation we experience
is really an illusion.
Like for instance
right now, we are
interacting with the background
radiation of the galaxy.
We might not be aware of it.
But we are, because
it's in the space.
We're interacting with all
the electromagnetic fields
and so on.
There's all kinds of
levels of interaction
that we're not directly
conscious of, including
more gross ones like the
fact that we're breathing
and our heart is beating and
our liver is doing its thing,
kidneys are doing--
there's all kinds of things
happening that we're not
consciously manipulating.
They're still happening.
And so we are
discovering that we
are profoundly deeper
and more complex
than initially we might
interpret ourself.
And that depth and
complexity emerge
not from some
philosophical ideas,
but actually from, literally,
the mechanics of how
the physical world emerge.
>> There is a concept that is
common amongst truth seekers
or people on the spiritual path
that there are spiritual things
and there are material things.
That, as well, is a concept
of separation, fragmentation,
and isolation.
Is it possible that what we call
the spiritual world may just
be the physics that we
have yet to understand
about the physical world, which
includes the information flows
that we call consciousness
or awareness?
>> It's kind of a funny
thing when we say I,
because if this is all true and
the space is full and it has
infinite division possibility,
then everything has infinity
in it.
And saying I is a little
bit confusing because when
you say I am who I am or I
am one, which I do you mean?
Do you mean you meaning
all of your cells?
all of your atoms
and then all of your cells?
Do you mean you meaning
all of your protons,
and so on and so on and so on?
You can't really find the end
of I or the beginning of I
because you can
divide to infinity.
And to think of yourself as a
being with infinite potential
might be a more accurate
understanding of yourself.
Then, to think of yourself
as just this agglomeration
of cells that happened to
come together a few years ago
and that will come apart
in the next few years
may not be an
accurate description
of who you are in relationship
to the universe as a whole.
At the deepest
level, who are you?
Well, maybe you are the whole
individualized into you.
And so when you
say I, you're only
describing one scale of you.
There might be whole other
levels of scales of you
that you're not aware of
because we haven't understood
this level of depth of reality
that we are discovering now.
And that depth and
complexity emerge
not from some
philosophical ideas,
but actually from literally
the mechanics of how
the physical world emerge.
The idea that there
is spiritual things
and there's material
things is, as well,
a concept of separation and
fragmentation and isolation.
In fact, what we call the
spiritual world in these views
may just be the physics
that we hadn't understood,
the dynamics of
the physical world
which includes the
information flow
that we call consciousness
or awareness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]